Readme.md, before:

# Checkmk Development Tools

This repository includes scripts/tools for Checkmk developers.

- TBD: what should go here
- TBD: what shouldn't go here

## Installation

While you can just clone and use the tools inside of course (they're just plain Python or Bash
scripts), the intended way to use it is via `pip` or inside a virtual environment.

Install it locally using `pip`:

```sh
[<PYTHON> -m] pip[3] install [--user] [--upgrade] checkmk-dev-tools
```

## Contained tools

### `ci-artifacts`

`ci-artifacts` is a tool for accessing and triggering (currently Jenkins only) CI job builds and
making build artifacts available locally in an efficient way (i.e. avoiding unnessessary builds by
comparing certain constraints like job parameters and time of already available builds).

Formerly it was only used to make artifacts available which is the reason for the name and some
CLI desing desicions.

#### Usage

Run `ci-artifacts --help` in general to get more details about the usage of the tool.

If no API key, username and URL to Jenkins is provided in `~/.config/jenkins_jobs/jenkins_jobs.ini` those parameters have to be specified explicitly.

This is a template of the `jenkins_jobs.ini` file

```
[jenkins]
user=carl.lama
# Get the APIKEY from the CI web UI, click top right Profile -> Configure -> Show API Key
# https://JENKINS_URL.tld/user/carl.lama/configure
password=API_KEY_NOT_YOUR_PASSWORD
url=https://JENKINS_URL.tld
query_plugins_info=False
```

##### Await result

Wait for an existing and specified build to finish. Nothing is downloaded.

```sh
ci-artifacts --log-level debug \
    await-result checkmk/master/builders/build-cmk-distro-package:6066
```

The returned result is a JSON might look like

```json
{"result": "SUCCESS", "artifacts": null}
```

##### Download

Wait for an existing and specified build to finish and download the artifacts.

The destination of the artifacts can be specified with the optional argument `--out-dir` (defaults to `out`) and is relative to the base directory (`--base-dir`, defaults to current directory) used to fetch hashes of the downloaded artifacts.
The flag `--no-remove-others` can be used to keep additional files in the download directory which were not part of the download. This is like a built-in garbage collection.

```sh
ci-artifacts --log-level debug \
    download checkmk/master/builders/build-cmk-distro-package:6066 \
    --base-dir ~/my-git-projects/checkmk/master \
    --out-dir package_download \
    --no-remove-others
```

The returned result is a JSON might look like

```json
{"result": "SUCCESS", "artifacts": ["check-mk-enterprise-2.4.0-2024.10.31_0.jammy_amd64.deb"]}
```

##### Fetch

If there are no more constraints than a build has been completed successfully, `fetch` downloads a given jobs artifact, just like with `download` but for the latest build instead of a specified build number.

Pressing `CTRL+C` while the script is running will ask for confirmation, default answer is `no` and cancel the build.

```sh
ci-artifacts --log-level debug \
    fetch checkmk/master/winagt-build
```

In contrast, this is what a more detailed call might look like

```sh
ci-artifacts --log-level debug \
    fetch checkmk/master/winagt-build \
    --params EDITION=raw,DISTRO="ubuntu-22.04",CUSTOM_GIT_REF=85fa488e0a32f6ea55d8875ab9c517bdc253a8e1 \
    --params-no-check DISABLE_CACHE=false,CIPARAM_OVERRIDE_BUILD_NODE=fra001 \
    --dependency-paths agents/wnx,agents/windows,packages/cmk-agent-ctl \
    --time-constraints today \
    --base-dir ~/my-git-projects/checkmk/master \
    --out-dir package_download
```

**`--params <JOB-PARAMETERS>`**

Comma separated list of job-parameters used for identifying existing builds and
to start new ones.

**`--params-no-check <JOB-PARAMETERS>`**

Comma separated list of job-parameters used only to start a new build. These parameters are ignored during the search of an already existing build.

**`--time-constraints <SPECIFIER>`**

Check for build date constraints when looking for existing builds - currently
only `today` is taken into account.

**`--dependency-paths <PATH,..>`**

Comma separated list of relative paths to files and directories checked for
differences when looking for existing builds.

**`--omit-new-build`**

Don't start new builds, even when no matching build could be found.

**`--force-new-build`**

Don't look for existing builds, always start a new build instead.

##### Request

Like `fetch` but with the optional parameter `--passive` which outputs the informations needed to trigger a build instead of triggering the build.
This is helpful in pipeline scripts to keep track of issuers of a build.

```sh
ci-artifacts --log-level debug \
    request checkmk/master/winagt-build \
    --params EDITION=raw,DISTRO="ubuntu-22.04",CUSTOM_GIT_REF=85fa488e0a32f6ea55d8875ab9c517bdc253a8e1 \
    --params-no-check DISABLE_CACHE=false,CIPARAM_OVERRIDE_BUILD_NODE=fra001 \
    --time-constraints today \
    --base-dir ~/my-git-projects/checkmk/master \
    --passive
```

```json
{
    "new_build":
    {
        "path": "checkmk/master/winagt-build",
        "params":
        {
            "EDITION": "raw",
            "DISTRO": "ubuntu-22.04",
            "CUSTOM_GIT_REF": "85fa488e0a32f6ea55d8875ab9c517bdc253a8e1",
            "DISABLE_CACHE": "false",
            "CIPARAM_OVERRIDE_BUILD_NODE": "fra001"
        }
    }
}
```

Without the `--passive` flag the build is triggered if no matching one is found. If a matching build with the specified parameters was found the returned JSON might look like

```json
{
    "existing":
    {
        "path": "checkmk/master/winagt-build",
        "number": 6066,
        "url": "https://JENKINS_URL.tld/job/checkmk/job/master/job/winagt-build/6066/",
        "result": "SUCCESS",
        "new_build": false
    }
}
```

##### Validate

The `validate` subcommand is a combination of several other commands. It requests, identifies a matching of triggers a new build while waiting for the build to complete. Nothing is downloaded. It has the same parameters as `fetch`.
This subcommand can be used to trigger a remote build with custom parameters or check if an existing build with these parameters passed or not.

```sh
ci-artifacts --log-level debug \
    validate checkmk/master/winagt-build \
    --params EDITION=raw,DISTRO="ubuntu-22.04",CUSTOM_GIT_REF=85fa488e0a32f6ea55d8875ab9c517bdc253a8e1 \
    --params-no-check DISABLE_CACHE=false,CIPARAM_OVERRIDE_BUILD_NODE=fra001 \
    --time-constraints today
```

```json
{"result": "SUCCESS", "artifacts": []}
```

#### Todo

- [ ] request CI build from local changes

## Development & Contribution

### Setup

For active development you need to have `poetry` and `pre-commit` installed

```sh
python3 -m pip install --upgrade --user poetry pre-commit
git clone ssh://review.lan.tribe29.com:29418/checkmk_dev_tools
cd checkmk_dev_tools
pre-commit install
# if you need a specific version of Python inside your dev environment
poetry env use ~/.pyenv/versions/3.10.4/bin/python3
poetry install
# install "poetry-bumpversion" to easily bump package version later
# it is not enough to add it to the projects pyproject.toml file
poetry self add poetry-bumpversion
```

### Workflow

Create a new changelog snippet. If no new snippets is found on a merged change
no new release will be built and published.

If the change is based on a Jira ticket, use the Jira ticket name as snippet
name otherwise use a unique name.

```sh
poetry run \
    changelog-generator \
    create .snippets/CMK-20150.md
```

After committing the snippet a changelog can be generated locally. For CI usage
the `--in-place` flag is recommended to use as it will update the existing
changelog with the collected snippets. For local usage remember to reset the
changelog file before a second run, as the version would be updated recursively
due to the way the changelog generator is working. It extracts the latest
version from the changelog file and puts the found snippets on top.

Future changes to the changelog are ignored by

```sh
git update-index --assume-unchanged changelog.md
```

```sh
poetry run \
    changelog-generator \
    changelog changelog.md \
    --snippets=.snippets \
    --in-place \
    --version-reference="https://review.lan.tribe29.com/gitweb?p=checkmk_dev_tools.git;a=tag;h=refs/tags/"
```

Update the version of the project in all required files by calling

```sh
poetry run \
    changelog2version \
    --changelog_file changelog.md \
    --version_file cmk_dev/version.py \
    --version_file_type py \
    --additional_version_info="-rc42+$(git rev-parse HEAD)" \
    --print \
    | jq -r .info.version
```

* (once and only for publishing to PyPi) Get token on PyPi.org
* (once and only for publishing to PyPi) `poetry config pypi-token.pypi pypi-<LONG-STRING>`
  (will write to `~/.config/pypoetry/auth.toml`)
* modify and check commits via `pre-commit run --all-files`
* after work is done locally:

  - update dependencies before/with a new release
```sh
poetry lock
```
  - build and check package locally
```sh
poetry build && \
poetry run twine check dist/* &&
python3 -m pip uninstall -y checkmk_dev_tools && \
python3 -m pip install --user dist/checkmk_dev_tools-$(grep -E "^version.?=" pyproject.toml | cut -d '"' -f 2)-py3-none-any.whl
```
  - commit, push, review and merge the changes, see `checkmk_dev_tools/+/88632/`
```sh
git add ...
git commit -m "cmk-dev-tools: bump version, update dependencies"
# merge
```
  - publish new package version
```sh
poetry publish --build [--repository checkmk_dev_tools]
git tag -a v<VERSION> <MERGE_COMMIT> -m "v<VERSION>"
git push --tags
```

Commit message:

Update documentation how to install package from test.pypi.org
... and remove description of manual deployment steps

Change-Id: I46b8a69c710dc50e828255c79fc5a4fec4030073

Readme.md, after:

# Checkmk Development Tools

This repository includes scripts/tools for Checkmk developers.

- TBD: what should go here
- TBD: what shouldn't go here

## Installation

While you can just clone and use the tools inside of course (they're just plain Python or Bash
scripts), the intended way to use it is via `pip` or inside a virtual environment.

Install it locally using `pip`:

```sh
[<PYTHON> -m] pip[3] install [--user] [--upgrade] checkmk-dev-tools
```

## Contained tools

### `ci-artifacts`

`ci-artifacts` is a tool for accessing and triggering (currently Jenkins only) CI job builds and
making build artifacts available locally in an efficient way (i.e. avoiding unnessessary builds by
comparing certain constraints like job parameters and time of already available builds).

Formerly it was only used to make artifacts available which is the reason for the name and some
CLI desing desicions.

#### Usage

Run `ci-artifacts --help` in general to get more details about the usage of the tool.

If no API key, username and URL to Jenkins is provided in `~/.config/jenkins_jobs/jenkins_jobs.ini` those parameters have to be specified explicitly.

This is a template of the `jenkins_jobs.ini` file

```
[jenkins]
user=carl.lama
# Get the APIKEY from the CI web UI, click top right Profile -> Configure -> Show API Key
# https://JENKINS_URL.tld/user/carl.lama/configure
password=API_KEY_NOT_YOUR_PASSWORD
url=https://JENKINS_URL.tld
query_plugins_info=False
```

##### Await result

Wait for an existing and specified build to finish. Nothing is downloaded.

```sh
ci-artifacts --log-level debug \
    await-result checkmk/master/builders/build-cmk-distro-package:6066
```

The returned result is a JSON might look like

```json
{"result": "SUCCESS", "artifacts": null}
```

##### Download

Wait for an existing and specified build to finish and download the artifacts.

The destination of the artifacts can be specified with the optional argument `--out-dir` (defaults to `out`) and is relative to the base directory (`--base-dir`, defaults to current directory) used to fetch hashes of the downloaded artifacts.
The flag `--no-remove-others` can be used to keep additional files in the download directory which were not part of the download. This is like a built-in garbage collection.

```sh
ci-artifacts --log-level debug \
    download checkmk/master/builders/build-cmk-distro-package:6066 \
    --base-dir ~/my-git-projects/checkmk/master \
    --out-dir package_download \
    --no-remove-others
```

The returned result is a JSON might look like

```json
{"result": "SUCCESS", "artifacts": ["check-mk-enterprise-2.4.0-2024.10.31_0.jammy_amd64.deb"]}
```

##### Fetch

If there are no more constraints than a build has been completed successfully, `fetch` downloads a given jobs artifact, just like with `download` but for the latest build instead of a specified build number.

Pressing `CTRL+C` while the script is running will ask for confirmation, default answer is `no` and cancel the build.

```sh
ci-artifacts --log-level debug \
    fetch checkmk/master/winagt-build
```

In contrast, this is what a more detailed call might look like

```sh
ci-artifacts --log-level debug \
    fetch checkmk/master/winagt-build \
    --params EDITION=raw,DISTRO="ubuntu-22.04",CUSTOM_GIT_REF=85fa488e0a32f6ea55d8875ab9c517bdc253a8e1 \
    --params-no-check DISABLE_CACHE=false,CIPARAM_OVERRIDE_BUILD_NODE=fra001 \
    --dependency-paths agents/wnx,agents/windows,packages/cmk-agent-ctl \
    --time-constraints today \
    --base-dir ~/my-git-projects/checkmk/master \
    --out-dir package_download
```

**`--params <JOB-PARAMETERS>`**

Comma separated list of job-parameters used for identifying existing builds and
to start new ones.

**`--params-no-check <JOB-PARAMETERS>`**

Comma separated list of job-parameters used only to start a new build. These parameters are ignored during the search of an already existing build.

**`--time-constraints <SPECIFIER>`**

Check for build date constraints when looking for existing builds - currently
only `today` is taken into account.

**`--dependency-paths <PATH,..>`**

Comma separated list of relative paths to files and directories checked for
differences when looking for existing builds.

**`--omit-new-build`**

Don't start new builds, even when no matching build could be found.

**`--force-new-build`**

Don't look for existing builds, always start a new build instead.

##### Request

Like `fetch` but with the optional parameter `--passive` which outputs the informations needed to trigger a build instead of triggering the build.
This is helpful in pipeline scripts to keep track of issuers of a build.

```sh
ci-artifacts --log-level debug \
    request checkmk/master/winagt-build \
    --params EDITION=raw,DISTRO="ubuntu-22.04",CUSTOM_GIT_REF=85fa488e0a32f6ea55d8875ab9c517bdc253a8e1 \
    --params-no-check DISABLE_CACHE=false,CIPARAM_OVERRIDE_BUILD_NODE=fra001 \
    --time-constraints today \
    --base-dir ~/my-git-projects/checkmk/master \
    --passive
```

```json
{
    "new_build":
    {
        "path": "checkmk/master/winagt-build",
        "params":
        {
            "EDITION": "raw",
            "DISTRO": "ubuntu-22.04",
            "CUSTOM_GIT_REF": "85fa488e0a32f6ea55d8875ab9c517bdc253a8e1",
            "DISABLE_CACHE": "false",
            "CIPARAM_OVERRIDE_BUILD_NODE": "fra001"
        }
    }
}
```

Without the `--passive` flag the build is triggered if no matching one is found. If a matching build with the specified parameters was found the returned JSON might look like

```json
{
    "existing":
    {
        "path": "checkmk/master/winagt-build",
        "number": 6066,
        "url": "https://JENKINS_URL.tld/job/checkmk/job/master/job/winagt-build/6066/",
        "result": "SUCCESS",
        "new_build": false
    }
}
```

##### Validate

The `validate` subcommand is a combination of several other commands. It requests, identifies a matching of triggers a new build while waiting for the build to complete. Nothing is downloaded. It has the same parameters as `fetch`.
This subcommand can be used to trigger a remote build with custom parameters or check if an existing build with these parameters passed or not.

```sh
ci-artifacts --log-level debug \
    validate checkmk/master/winagt-build \
    --params EDITION=raw,DISTRO="ubuntu-22.04",CUSTOM_GIT_REF=85fa488e0a32f6ea55d8875ab9c517bdc253a8e1 \
    --params-no-check DISABLE_CACHE=false,CIPARAM_OVERRIDE_BUILD_NODE=fra001 \
    --time-constraints today
```

```json
{"result": "SUCCESS", "artifacts": []}
```

#### Todo

- [ ] request CI build from local changes

## Development & Contribution

### Setup

For active development you need to have `poetry` and `pre-commit` installed

```sh
python3 -m pip install --upgrade --user poetry pre-commit
git clone ssh://review.lan.tribe29.com:29418/checkmk_dev_tools
cd checkmk_dev_tools
pre-commit install
# if you need a specific version of Python inside your dev environment
poetry env use ~/.pyenv/versions/3.10.4/bin/python3
poetry install
# install "poetry-bumpversion" to easily bump package version later
# it is not enough to add it to the projects pyproject.toml file
poetry self add poetry-bumpversion
```

### Workflow

Create a new changelog snippet. If no new snippets is found on a merged change
no new release will be built and published.

If the change is based on a Jira ticket, use the Jira ticket name as snippet
name otherwise use a unique name.

```sh
poetry run \
    changelog-generator \
    create .snippets/CMK-20150.md
```

After committing the snippet a changelog can be generated locally. For CI usage
the `--in-place` flag is recommended to use as it will update the existing
changelog with the collected snippets. For local usage remember to reset the
changelog file before a second run, as the version would be updated recursively
due to the way the changelog generator is working. It extracts the latest
version from the changelog file and puts the found snippets on top.

Future changes to the changelog are ignored by

```sh
git update-index --assume-unchanged changelog.md
```

```sh
poetry run \
    changelog-generator \
    changelog changelog.md \
    --snippets=.snippets \
    --in-place \
    --version-reference="https://review.lan.tribe29.com/gitweb?p=checkmk_dev_tools.git;a=tag;h=refs/tags/"
```

Update the version of the project in all required files by calling

```sh
poetry run \
    changelog2version \
    --changelog_file changelog.md \
    --version_file cmk_dev/version.py \
    --version_file_type py \
    --additional_version_info="-rc42+$(git rev-parse HEAD)" \
    --print \
    | jq -r .info.version
```

* modify and check commits via `pre-commit run --all-files`
* after work is done locally:

  - update dependencies before/with a new release
```sh
poetry lock
```
  - build and check package locally
```sh
poetry build && \
poetry run twine check dist/* &&
python3 -m pip uninstall -y checkmk_dev_tools && \
python3 -m pip install --user dist/checkmk_dev_tools-$(grep -E "^version.?=" pyproject.toml | cut -d '"' -f 2)-py3-none-any.whl
```
  - commit, push and review the changes
```sh
git add ...
git commit -m "cmk-dev-tools: bump version, update dependencies"
```
  - test deployed packages from `test.pypi.org`. The extra index URL is required to get those dependencies from `pypi.org` which are not available from `test.pypi.org`
```sh
pip install --no-cache-dir \
    -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ \
    --extra-index-url https://pypi.org/simple \
    checkmk-dev-tools==<VERSION_WITH_RC>
```
  - finally merge the changes and let Jenkins create the release tag and deployment
